Introduces 42I79 (#504)
neo4j/docs-status-codes: modules/ROOT/pages/errors/gql-errors/42I79.adoc

= 42I79

== Status description
error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid reference in subclause expression. Aggregation in subclause expression is not allowed to reference variables declared in the same clause { <<argList>> }.

== Explanation

> A subclause expression is an expression in a subclause, e.g. ORDER BY or WHERE, that belongs to a projection clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A subclause expression is an expression used in a subclause (e.g., `WHERE` or `ORDER BY`) that belongs to a projection clause.
```

> If that expression is aggregating it is not allowed to reference aliases introduced in the same projection clause,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If that expression is aggregating, it is not allowed to reference aliases introduced in the same projection clause; only variables incoming to the clause are allowed.
```

> only variables incoming to the clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

== Example scenario

> For example, sorting by an aggregation over a variable that the same `RETURN` clause introduces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try sorting by an aggregation over a variable that the same `RETURN` clause introduces:
```

> .Aggregates over parity, which is declared in the same clause

Reviewer: When I run this query, I get an error chain with different error codes:
```
42I24: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid use of aggregate function. Aggregate expression 'sum(parity)' is not allowed in this context. (line 3, column 12 (offset: 76))
"  ORDER BY sum(parity)"
            ^
  42001: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid syntax
```

Reviewer: I used `neo4j-enterprise-2026.07.0-61843` distribution.

Author: Yes, the changes are not merged yet. From 2026.07+ (if we make the cut) we will have more relaxed rules around aggregations in subclause expressions.

Author: How do you do to run the development versions?

Reviewer: I just took one from TC.

[source,cypher]
----
UNWIND [1, 2, 3, 4] AS x
RETURN x % 2 AS parity, sum(x) AS total

>   ORDER BY sum(parity)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ORDER BY sum(parity);
```

----

`sum(parity)` is an aggregation, and `parity` is introduced by the same `RETURN` clause.

> An error will be thrown with GQLSTATUS 42I79 and the following status description:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query returns an error with GQLSTATUS 42I79 and status description:
```

> [source]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.GQLSTATUS error
[source, error]
```

----
error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid reference in subclause expression. Aggregation in subclause expression is not allowed to reference variables declared in the same clause parity.
----

== Possible solutions

To resolve this issue, aggregate over the underlying incoming expression instead of the same-clause alias:

.Aggregates over the underlying expression x % 2
[source,cypher]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----
UNWIND [1, 2, 3, 4] AS x
RETURN x % 2 AS parity, sum(x) AS total

>   ORDER BY sum(x % 2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ORDER BY sum(x % 2);
```

----

Alternatively, compute the value in a preceding clause so it is an incoming variable rather than one declared in the same clause:

.Introduces parity in an earlier clause
[source,cypher]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----
UNWIND [1, 2, 3, 4] AS x
LET parity = x % 2
RETURN parity, sum(x) AS total

>   ORDER BY sum(parity)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ORDER BY sum(parity);
```

----

If the aggregation is meant to reuse a value already projected by the clause, reference that return item by its alias without re-aggregating it:

.Sorts by the existing total aggregation
[source,cypher]

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----
UNWIND [1, 2, 3, 4] AS x
RETURN x % 2 AS parity, sum(x) AS total

>   ORDER BY total

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ORDER BY total;
```
